of occurrences of the ith letter of the alphabet in the ciphertext divided by the length of the ciphertext. If the key is k, then should be roughly equal to for all i, because the ith letter is mapped to the (i+k)th letter. (We use i+k instead of the more cumbersome [i+k mod 26].) Thus, if we compute

I_j = Σ p_i · q_{i+j}

for each value of j ∈ {0, ..., 25}, then we expect to find that I_k ≈ 0.065 (where k is the actual key), whereas I_j for j ≠ k will be different from 0.065. This leads to a key-recovery attack that is easy to automate: compute I_j for all j, and then output the value k for which I_k is closest to 0.065.

The Vigenère (poly-alphabetic shift) cipher. The statistical attack on the mono-alphabetic substitution cipher can be carried out because the key defines a fixed mapping that is applied letter-by-letter to the plaintext. Such an attack could be thwarted by using a poly-alphabetic substitution cipher where the key instead defines a mapping that is applied on blocks of plaintext characters. Here, for example, a key might map the 2-character block ab to DZ while mapping ac to TY; note that the plaintext character a does not get mapped to a fixed ciphertext character. Poly-alphabetic substitution ciphers “smooth out” the frequency distribution of characters in the ciphertext and make it harder to perform statistical analysis.

The Vigenère cipher, a special case of the above also called the poly-alphabetic shift cipher, works by applying several independent instances of the shift cipher in sequence. The key is now viewed as a string of letters; encryption is done by shifting each plaintext character by the amount indicated by the next character of the key, wrapping around in the key when necessary. (This degenerates to the shift cipher if the key has length 1.) For example, encryption of the message tellhimaboutme using the key cafe would work as follows:

Plaintext: tellhimaboutme
Key (repeated): cafecafecafeca
Ciphertext: VEQPJIREDOZXOE

(The key need not be an English word.) This is exactly the same as encrypting the first, fifth, ninth, ... characters with the shift cipher and key c; the second, sixth, tenth, ... characters with key a; the third, seventh, ... characters with key f; and the fourth, eighth, ... characters with key e. Notice that in the above example l is mapped once to Q and once to P. Furthermore, the ciphertext character E is sometimes obtained from e and sometimes from a. Thus, the character frequencies of the ciphertext are “smoothed out,” as desired.

If the key is sufficiently long, cracking this cipher appears daunting. Indeed, it had been considered by many to be “unbreakable,” and although it was invented in the 16th century, a systematic attack on the scheme was only devised hundreds of years later.

